Tisk is an intermediate language format developed to enable thread level parallelism from within a structured functional level without the need for a programmer to explicitly define how it is meant to be distributed. Its goal is to enable developers to create applications that safely and efficiently distribute data over many parallel units and also be able to utilize hardware enhancements to speed up program execution by utilizing the maximum available resources on both commodity hardware and high end systems.

Tisk is not a high level language. Instead of re-inventing the wheel when it comes to languages, we’ve opted to go for a low level solution that allows us to embed metadata directly in the code rather then spending our time flushing out the details of a high level language and developing the semantics. There are currently some variants of other higher level languages under development, such as C/C++, but that is not the focus of Tisk.

With modern hardware growing in complexity, it has become increasingly difficult for a programmer to be able to create scalable multithreaded applications. While many other languages exist to try to eleviate this problem, the growing complexity has meant that a large degree of programmers can not accurately and predictably scale to new architectures without significant code changes. Tisk attempts to alleviate this problem by providing hints embedded at the instruction level, that tell the compiler how it treats the data and what operations it will perform on the data. It monitors everything from cache usage, spatial and temporal locality, to handling IO operations and balancing bandwidth across multiple channels. A Tisk executable is meant to be compiled locally for every machine it runs on, so the intermediate language does not generate code specific to one specific architecture, but provides hints for how the data is used and allows the machine language compiler to expand upon that to develop the most efficient code possible for that machine.

Tisk is currently under development.